Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
250
nature reviews cardiology
Evidence-based guidelines
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-023-00940-9
 Check for updates
2023 World Heart Federation 
guidelines for the echocardiographic 
diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease
Joselyn Rwebembera 
  1,38 
, James Marangou 
  2,3,4,38, Julius Chacha Mwita5, Ana Olga Mocumbi 
  6, Cleonice Mota7,8, 
Emmy Okello1, Bruno Nascimento9,10, Lene Thorup11, Andrea Beaton12,13, Joseph Kado14,15, Alexander Kaethner2,16, 
Raman Krishna Kumar17, John Lawrenson18,19, Eloi Marijon 
  20, Mariana Mirabel21, Maria Carmo Pereira Nunes9,10, 
Daniel Piñeiro22, Fausto Pinto 
  23, Kate Ralston24, Craig Sable25, Amy Sanyahumbi26, Anita Saxena27, Karen Sliwa28, 
Andrew Steer29,30,31, Satupaitea Viali32, Gavin Wheaton33, Nigel Wilson34, Liesl Zühlke35,36 & Bo Reményi 
  2,16,37
Abstract
Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) is an important and preventable 
cause of morbidity and mortality among children and young adults in 
low-income and middle-income countries, as well as among certain 
at-risk populations living in high-income countries. The 2012 World 
Heart Federation echocardiographic criteria provided a standardized 
approach for the identification of RHD and facilitated an improvement 
in early case detection. The 2012 criteria were used to define disease 
burden in numerous epidemiological studies, but researchers and 
clinicians have since highlighted limitations that have prompted a 
revision. In this updated version of the guidelines, we incorporate 
evidence from a scoping review, an expert panel and end-user feedback 
and present an approach for active case finding for RHD, including 
the use of screening and confirmatory criteria. These guidelines also 
introduce a new stage-based classification for RHD to identify the 
risk of disease progression. They describe the latest evidence and 
recommendations on population-based echocardiographic active 
case finding and risk stratification. Secondary antibiotic prophylaxis, 
echocardiography equipment and task sharing for RHD active case 
finding are also discussed. These World Heart Federation 2023 
guidelines provide a concise and updated resource for clinical and 
research applications in RHD-endemic regions.
Sections
Introduction
Revising the guidelines
Echocardiographic criteria 
and staging of RHD
RHD care implications
Active case finding
Future directions
Conclusions
A full list of affiliations appears at the end of the paper.
 e-mail: joselynr36@gmail.com
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
251
Evidence-based guidelines
discreet classification system used in the WHF 2012 guidelines7. These 
developments are summarized in Boxes 2 and 3.
Aim
These WHF 2023 guidelines aim to define the minimum echocardio-
graphic criteria for diagnosing RHD according to the best-available evi-
dence. These guidelines do not describe all rheumatic valvular lesions 
and the spectrum of diseases, nor do they intend to provide compre-
hensive management guidance on the different presentations of val-
vular heart disease (these topics are discussed in other clinical practice 
guidelines14–16). The focus of this document on the echocardio­graphic 
diagnosis of RHD complements, but does not overlap with, the 2023 
American Society of Echocardiography report that focuses on provid-
ing recommendations for advanced RHD14. The current guidelines are 
designed to provide diagnostic guidance for health-care practitioners 
and researchers conducting active case-finding programmes, for 
opportunistic case detection in clinical settings, and for health-care 
practitioners who detect possible RHD cases as part of routine care.
Methods
An international panel of experts in the screening and echocardio-
graphic imaging of RHD were involved in revising the WHF 2012 guide-
lines to develop this updated, evidence-based version7. A scoping 
review (not yet published) will summarize the available evidence on 
the performance of the WHF 2012 criteria, including the specificity 
(in low-prevalence populations), the inter-rater reliability and various 
modifications of the criteria for diagnostic simplicity. The panel of 
experts also conducted an end-user survey to assess the applicabil-
ity and usability of the WHF 2012 guidelines. The evidence gathered 
from the scoping review, alongside end-user feedback from the survey, 
generated three main conclusions: first, the important role of task 
sharing and the need for a simplified set of criteria that health-care 
practitioners with limited training using hand-held devices could 
adopt; second, that the WHF 2012 criteria did not take into account 
the continuum of early rheumatic valvular changes that might regress, 
progress and overlap with normal valve morphology; and third, that 
certain aspects of the WHF 2012 criteria were subjective and difficult 
to replicate, especially in the clinical setting. Of note, the WHF 2012 
criteria were primarily written for use by research teams performing 
epidemiological studies. However these criteria have now also been 
widely incorporated into clinical use in RHD-endemic and non-endemic 
Introduction
Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) remains the leading acquired car-
diovascular disease among children and young adults in low-income 
and middle-income countries and in some at-risk populations living 
in high-income countries1,2. RHD results from cumulative valvular 
damage that is largely preventable by secondary antibiotic prophy-
laxis (SAP)3,4. Given that clinically detectable RHD might present 
after years of subclinical disease, the detection of early RHD by 
echocardiography and the subsequent initiation of SAP, alongside 
other established strategies, may reduce the global burden of RHD5. 
Echocardiography is vastly superior to auscultation for detecting 
RHD6. In 2012, the World Heart Federation (WHF) published the first 
evidence-based guidelines for the echocardiographic diagnosis of 
RHD7 (referred to in this article as the WHF 2012 guidelines). These 
guidelines included the minimum criteria required to diagnose 
RHD, harmonized the diagnosis and classification approach for RHD 
across global regions and were especially useful for epidemiological 
studies. Although the WHF 2012 guidelines were research-oriented, 
they have since become a frequently used tool in clinical settings 
for diagnosing RHD. However, research and real-world experience 
with the WHF 2012 guidelines have led to the identification of some 
limitations in the criteria. This includes the heterogeneous outcomes 
of echocardiography-detected RHD and the practical challenges in 
applying the criteria in the busy settings in which RHD active case 
finding occurs8,9.
Over the past decade, the RHD research community has made 
important strides in understanding the natural history of RHD8 and 
risk factors for its progression10. Concurrently, the management strate-
gies for the early stages of RHD were assessed, including the efficacy 
of SAP4. Furthermore, there has been an increasing appreciation of 
hand-held echocardiography and task sharing for active case finding 
in resource-limited settings11–13. The evidence and experience accrued 
over the past decade have thus prompted this revision. The WHF 2023 
guidelines incorporate evidence gathered from a scoping review, an 
expert panel and end-user feedback obtained through a global survey on 
the utility of the WHF 2012 guidelines7. In these updated guidelines, we 
provide the revised minimum echocardiographic criteria for the defini-
tive diagnosis of RHD; a new classification of RHD that is dependent on 
the risk of disease progression; a two-step echocardiography algorithm 
for RHD active case finding, including screening criteria for detecting 
suspected cases and confirmatory criteria for the definitive diagnosis 
of RHD; management recommendations for early-stage RHD; and 
guidance for task sharing and the use of hand-held echocardiography 
in RHD active case finding.
These WHF 2023 guidelines, endorsed by globally representa-
tive societies (Box 1), are a pragmatic, contemporary and relevant 
reference tool that can be utilized for clinical and research applica-
tions in RHD-endemic regions across the world. They provide an 
evidence-based guide for the standardization of disease definitions, 
diagnostic criteria, risk assessment strategies and management 
approaches for patients with varying severities of RHD.
Revising the guidelines
Changes to the WHF 2012 guidelines
In the revised WHF 2023 guidelines, we have introduced a new set of 
echocardiographic criteria — the ‘screening criteria’ — to facilitate task 
sharing in active case-finding programmes. We have also formulated 
a stage-based classification system for RHD that reflects the continu-
ous spectrum of the disease and risk of progression, as opposed to the 
Box 1
Endorsements
Organizations that endorse these World Heart Federation 2023 
guidelines:
•
• American Heart Association
•
• Australian Heart Foundation
•
• Interamerican Society of Cardiology
•
• Pan-African Society of Cardiology
•
• South African Heart Association
•
• Writing Group of the 2020 Australian guideline for the prevention, 
diagnosis and management of acute rheumatic fever and 
rheumatic heart disease
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
252
Evidence-based guidelines
settings. This includes the development of task-sharing and active 
case-finding programmes for the echocardiographic detection of RHD. 
Consequently, an updated version of the guidelines was necessary to 
improve the utility across these various applications.
Grading of evidence
The classification of recommendations and levels of evidence are 
expressed in accordance with the 2016 ACC/AHA grading system17.
Summary of recommendations
Figure 1 summarizes the steps from screening to confirmatory echo-
cardiography and subsequent care plans for children and young adults 
diagnosed with RHD through active case-finding programmes. In addi-
tion, Table 1 summarizes the recommendations for RHD care pathways 
by disease stage, and Table 2 provides an overview of recommenda-
tions for at-risk populations, equipment use, task sharing for active 
case-finding and technology for RHD screening to improve RHD care 
in endemic regions.
Echocardiographic criteria and staging of RHD
Two sets of criteria are presented that can be integrated into the 
stage-based diagnostic strategy, including a new set of ‘screening cri-
teria’ as well as ‘confirmatory criteria’. The latter are largely similar to the 
original WHF 2012 criteria, but with minor modifications. The WHF 2023 
guidelines also present a staging process for RHD diagnosis on the basis 
of the risk of disease progression.
The two-step screening criteria and confirmatory criteria have 
been developed predominantly to assist in coordinated population- 
based screening programmes that might or might not involve task 
sharing. In terms of task sharing, non-experts can use the screening 
criteria to conduct screening echocardiograms, but the same steps can 
also be performed by experts to save time during screening or in clinical 
settings, or when the appropriate equipment for applying the confirma-
tory set of criteria is not available. Confirmatory echocardiograms 
can be performed in individuals who have a positive screening result, 
or as a single step in individuals without a history of acute rheumatic 
fever (ARF) or RHD by experts who have ready access to the necessary 
echocardiography equipment.
Screening criteria for the echocardiographic detection of RHD
The screening criteria are intended to rapidly detect possible disease 
in settings in which RHD is highly prevalent and in which equipment 
and health-care providers are limited (Box 4). They are only appli-
cable to individuals aged 20 years or less. They can also be applied 
in high-volume screening programmes that use task sharing and 
hand-held devices. The criteria have been selected on the basis of the 
best-known evidence to provide greater sensitivity, as a screening test, 
at the expense of specificity. The two-step screening strategy should 
be adopted whenever possible (Fig. 1a).
Following up a screening echocardiogram with a confirmatory 
echocardiogram might not be possible in certain high-risk populations 
from resource-limited regions. In some circumstances, a diagnosis on 
Box 2
New features of the World Heart 
Federation 2023 guidelines
•
• Introduction of two sets of echocardiographic criteria for RHD:
-- Screening criteria are designed principally for non-experts  
to apply in appropriate settings for detecting suspected  
cases of RHD
-- Confirmatory criteria are designed for experts to use to 
confirm a diagnosis of RHD
•
• Classification of RHD into stages A, B, C and D on the basis of the  
risk of progression to more advanced valvular heart disease; 
the terms ‘borderline’, ‘definite’ and ‘latent’ RHD are no longer 
recommended
•
• Weight-based measurements for valvular regurgitation jet length
•
• Recommendations for the management for early stages of RHD
RHD, rheumatic heart disease.
Box 3
Diagnostic category terms in 
the World Heart Federation 
2012 guidelines that are no 
longer recommended
Latent RHD
Valvular changes consistent with rheumatic heart disease (RHD) 
that are detected by echocardiography in an individual with no 
known history of acute rheumatic fever or symptoms of RHD. This 
term incorporates a vast range of diseases, from echocardiographic 
features meeting minimal diagnostic criteria through to clinically 
significant disease. This term is no longer recommended and is 
superseded by the stage categories in these revised guidelines.
Borderline RHD
This term designates patients with abnormal valve appearance  
on echocardiography, with some but not all features consistent 
with RHD. In the 2012 World Heart Federation (WHF) guidelines,  
this cate­gory only applied to individuals aged ≤20 years, given  
that some valvular features might take time to develop. This 
category has been recognized to represent a spectrum from 
‘normal valve’ to early-stage RHD. This term is no longer 
recommen­ded for disease classification and is incorporated within 
stage A (minimal echocardiographic criteria for RHD) in these 
revised guidelines.
Definite RHD
The term was used to refer to the abnormal valvular appearance 
with regurgitation or stenosis of aortic or mitral valves on 
echocardio­graphy meeting the WHF 2012 criteria for RHD. This term 
is no longer recommended and is incorporated within stage B (mild 
RHD), stage C (advanced RHD) and stage D (advanced RHD with 
established complications) in these revised guidelines.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
253
Evidence-based guidelines
In settings in which an expert is obtaining or reviewing 
images with a standard echocardiography machine, 
combined screening and confirmatory echocardiography 
might be more appropriate
Pathological MR or 
pathological AR with no 
abnormal morphology
• Pathological MR and AR 
with normal morphology
OR
• Pathological MR or AR 
with at least 1 
morphological criterion 
if ≤20 years old
OR
• Pathological MR or AR 
with at least 2 
morphological criteria if 
>20 years old
Stage Ac
Stage B
Stages C and D
No history of 
ARF or RHD
Screening
echocardiogram
Confirmatory 
echocardiograma
Confirmatory echocardiogram shows evidence of 
established RHD (moderate or severe MR, moderate 
or severe AR, any MS or AS, pulmonary hypertension 
or decreased LV systolic function)
Negative screen
(RHD echocardiogram does not meet the 
minimum criteria for a positive screen)
• Minimum MR jet length (1.5 cm for patients weighing 
<30 kg and 2.0 cm for patients weighing ≥30 kg) present in at 
least one view for at least two consecutive frames
OR
• Any AR jet observed in at least one view for at least two 
consecutive frames
OR
• Restricted MV leaflet motion and reduced opening
Criteria for pathological MR (requires all):
• Observed in two views 
• Minimum MR jet length (1.5 cm for patients 
weighing <30 kg and 2.0 cm for patients 
weighing ≥30 kg) observed in one view 
• Velocity >3.0 m/sb 
• Pan-systolic jetb
Criteria for pathological AR (requires all):
• Observed in two views
• Velocity >3.0 m/sb 
• Pan-diastolic jetb
RHD morphological criteria: 
• MV anterior leaflet thickening and/or MV 
chordal thickening
• MV leaflet restriction and/or excessive anterior 
leaflet tip motion
• AV thickening, prolapse or restricted leaflet 
motion
a   Approach to RHD screening
b   Approach to RHD classification
c  Staging and care recommendations
Positive screen
Confirm pathological 
MR or AR, excluding all 
other causes
No
Evaluate morphological 
features of AV and MV
Only proceed if yes
Yes
Minimum echocardiographic criteria for 
RHD achieved; patient might be at risk of 
disease progression
Definition
Low risk on the basis of risk score
Risk of progression
Enrolment in an RHD registry; SAP initiation 
is reasonable (class 2A recommendation)d; 
re-review using echocardiogram data in 
1–2 years (class 1 recommendation)
Initial care
Cessation of SAP could be considered if 
echocardiographic findings are normal 
after 1–2 years (class 2B recommendation)
Prophylaxis duration
Mild RHD; patient is at risk of developing 
clinical symptoms of valvular heart 
disease
Moderate or high risk of RHD progression 
on the basis of risk score
Enrolment in RHD registry; SAP is 
recommended (class 1 recommendation)
Per local guidelines, or WHO guidelines if 
local guidelines are unavailable
Advanced RHD; patient is at high risk of developing 
clinical complications (stage C) or already has clinical 
complications (stage D) and is needing medical or 
surgical intervention (in addition to SAP)
Patients with stage C disease are at high risk of 
progression to stage D and/or death
Enrolment in RHD registry; SAP (class 1A 
recommendation) per local guidelines, and specialized 
care per local, regional or international guidelines
Per local guidelines, or WHO guidelines if local 
guidelines are unavailable
Fig. 1 | The approach to active case finding, classification and care 
implications for rheumatic heart disease in endemic regions. a, Screening 
for rheumatic heart disease (RHD). aAlthough confirmatory echocardiography 
is recommended before the initiation of secondary antibiotic prophylaxis (SAP), 
in settings in which confirmatory echocardiography cannot be performed 
immediately, SAP can be initiated in patients while waiting for  a confirmatory 
study. The final decision should be made by or in consultation with a clinician 
with expertise in RHD diagnosis. b, Classification of RHD. bThese criteria can 
be achieved in two separate views or from two separate continuous-wave 
Doppler measures. c, Staging and care recommendations. cStage A only applies 
to individuals aged 20 years or less. dEvidence from a randomized, controlled 
trial showed that SAP reduces the risk of RHD progression in children aged 
5–17 years with stage A or stage B RHD4. However, SAP is also associated with 
adverse effects, including allergy and anaphylaxis, and numerous health-system 
factors should be considered before the roll-out of large-scale SAP programmes. 
Consequently, there is a need to consider family and clinician decisions, as well 
as health-system factors before recommending SAP in individuals aged ≤ 20 
years with stage A RHD who are at low risk of RHD progression. However, all 
children with stage A disease must have access to follow-up echocardiography 
and longitudinal clinical evaluation to monitor for disease progression. AR, 
aortic regurgitation; ARF, acute rheumatic fever; AS, aortic stenosis; AV, aortic 
valve; LV, left ventricular; MR, mitral regurgitation; MS, mitral stenosis; MV, 
mitral valve.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
254
Evidence-based guidelines
the basis of the screening criteria in combination with clinical features 
and a high pre-test probability of disease might be reasonable, with 
the final decision to be made by or in consultation with a clinician 
with expertise in diagnosing RHD.
Rationale and evidence. The screening criteria proposed were derived 
from an analysis of numerous studies that have evaluated abbreviated 
(modified) versions of the WHF 2012 criteria18–22. Although the modified 
criteria and the echocardiography protocols have varied between stud-
ies, the sensitivity of modified criteria compared with the WHF 2012 
criteria across these studies has been satisfactory12,18,23,24. Most of these 
studies have utilized valvular regurgitation alone, excluding morpho-
logical features, to screen for RHD, which is reflected in the screening 
criteria presented in this guideline.
In the current guidelines, the definitions of mitral and aortic 
regurgitation have been simplified by excluding the need for spectral 
Doppler imaging. This simplification will enable the application of the 
screening criteria using hand-held devices that do not have spectral 
Doppler capacity and allows ease of application in settings with large 
volume, active case-finding programmes or task sharing.
The detection of mitral regurgitation has demonstrated 
substantial-to-almost-perfect inter-reviewer reliability for the diagno-
sis of RHD8,25,26 and is the most common lesion detected when screening 
for RHD. Therefore, mitral regurgitation forms the basis of the abbrevi-
ated criteria. Several reports have analysed various combinations of 
mitral and aortic jet lengths from expert-performed and task-sharing 
echocardiographic screening studies to determine the optimal sensi-
tivity and specificity20,27,28. Reporting minimal mitral regurgitation jet 
lengths as a positive screen has been shown to have a high sensitivity for 
detecting RHD18,21,22,27,28. However, the high rates of false positives that 
this protocol would produce in clinical practice (requiring confirma-
tory echocardiography) make this strategy impractical12. Available 
data support a mitral valve jet length of 1.5–2.0 cm as having the best 
balance between sensitivity (73–81%) and specificity (75–100%) for the 
detection of RHD18,20,22. A study that assessed the inter-rater reliability 
and individual reviewer performance of the 2012 WHF guidelines dem-
onstrated the highest β-coefficient using a mitral regurgitation jet 
length of ≥2.0 cm26. The two jet lengths for different weight cut-offs 
presented in these guidelines were proposed by our panel of experts 
to ensure a high sensitivity of the criteria in the younger paediatric 
population. Studies that have assessed the WHF 2012 guidelines in 
populations with a low prevalence of RHD have demonstrated low rates 
(0.5–0.8%) of pathological mitral regurgitation, presumably represent-
ing the upper limit of normal physiological mitral regurgitation29–31. 
The requirement for the regurgitant jet to be observed in more than 
one consecutive frame can provide a surrogate for spectral Doppler 
imaging. A jet that is observed in more than one consecutive frame is 
less likely to be a closing volume than one that is observed in only one 
frame and is more consistent with pan-systolic regurgitation21.
As defined by the WHF 2012 criteria, pathological aortic regur-
gitation has been reported in two studies to have almost perfect 
inter-reviewer reliability for the detection of RHD (κ = 0.86 and 
0.95)26,32. The sensitivity and specificity of reducing aortic regurgita-
tion from a minimum jet length of 10 mm to any detected regurgitation 
have been described in numerous studies and remain adequate as 
screening criteria10,18,20,21. In addition, in a 2019 study, aortic regurgita-
tion remained one of the highly significant variables in a point-based 
score (β-coefficient = 4.8) used to predict unfavourable outcomes10. 
Ensuring that the regurgitation jet is observed in more than one frame 
again excludes closing volumes and physiological regurgitation21.
Confirmatory criteria for the echocardiographic detection of 
RHD
The criteria for the detection of RHD using pathological valvular 
regurgitation and mitral stenosis are indicated in Box 5 and those for 
RHD-defining morphological features are in Box 6.
Rationale and evidence. The confirmatory criteria, which involve 
the use of 2D imaging, colour Doppler and continuous-wave Dop-
pler echocardiography, aim to discriminate between physiological 
Table 1 | Recommendations for care pathways for rheumatic heart disease by disease stage
Stage
Initial care
SAP duration
Class of 
recommendation
Level of 
evidence
Positive 
screening 
criteria
Refer for confirmatory echocardiogram. In special 
circumstancesa, enrolling in the RHD registry and/or initiating 
SAP might be reasonable while awaiting a confirmatory 
echocardiogram
Until a confirmatory echocardiogram  
has been obtained
2A
C–EO
A
Enrolment in the RHD registry. SAP can be commenced. 
Re-review with a comprehensive echocardiogram in 1–2 years is 
recommended
Cessation of SAP could be considered  
if echocardiographic findings are normal  
after 1–2 years
2B
B–R
B
Enrolment in the RHD registry. SAP is recommended
According to local guidelines or WHO guidelines 
for the management of mild RHD, if local 
guidelines do not exist
1
A
C
Enrolment in the RHD registry. SAP should be administered 
according to local recommendations and specialized care 
implemented according to local, regional or international 
recommendations
According to local guidelines or WHO guidelines 
for the management of moderate-to-severe RHD, 
if local guidelines do not exist
1
B–NR
D
Enrolment in the RHD registry. SAP should be administered 
according to local recommendations and specialized care 
implemented according to local, regional or international 
recommendations
According to local guidelines or WHO guidelines 
for the management of moderate-to-severe RHD, 
if local guidelines do not exist
1
B–NR
EO, expert opinion; NR, non-randomized; R, randomized; RHD, rheumatic heart disease; SAP, secondary antibiotic prophylaxis. aApplicable for patients with a high suspicion of RHD on the basis 
of the level of risk and echocardiography findings in settings with limited access to confirmatory echocardiography, with the final decision to be made by or in consultation with a clinician with 
expertise in RHD diagnosis.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
255
Evidence-based guidelines
and pathological changes in the valves with reasonable accuracy and 
inter-rater reliability10. Differentiating between individual morphologi-
cal features can be challenging, which is especially true when trying to 
distinguish between two features of mitral apparatus thickening (ante-
rior leaflet and chordal thickening) and the two features of abnormal 
mitral valve motion (restrictive leaflet motion and excessive motion of 
the anterior leaflet tip). In each case, the paired abnormalities probably 
reflect a similar pathological finding10. Furthermore, the abnormalities 
within the two categories of morphological changes are continuous 
and often coexist. Accordingly, these features have a lower inter-rater 
reliability than pathological valvular regurgitation33,34. Analyses in 
multiple populations have led to the development of a risk prediction 
score that performs well in distinguishing between a low risk of disease 
progression and a moderate or severe risk of disease progression 
and includes the criterion of one morphological feature in addition 
to pathological regurgitation of the associated valve in individuals 
aged ≤20 years10. Additional data from a randomized trial and several 
natural history studies have shown an increased risk of developing 
RHD in patients with pathological mitral or aortic regurgitation and at 
least one morphological feature4,35. Given that mild valve thickening 
is common in adults, two morphological features are still required to 
diagnose those aged >20 years.
These WHF 2023 guidelines simplify the morphological features 
needed for the diagnosis and have created two morphological cat-
egories for the mitral valve: the thickening of the valvular apparatus 
(defined by the presence of either or both valvular and chordal thick-
ening) and valve mobility (defined by the presence of either or both 
restricted and excessive leaflet motion). The morphological features 
of the aortic valve have not been combined because individual fea-
tures are more specific for RHD. However, only one morphological 
feature is needed together with the presence of pathological aortic 
regurgitation for a diagnosis of mild RHD.
Staging of RHD based on the risk of disease progression
The natural history of early RHD is heterogeneous, and studies have 
demonstrated that the echocardiographic features of RHD might 
regress, remain unchanged or progress over time4,8. The GOAL study4 
showed that treating early-stage RHD with SAP reduced disease pro-
gression at 2 years of follow-up. However, the study also highlighted 
the heterogeneous nature of early disease, with 50% of borderline and 
30% of mild cases regressing spontaneously (without the need for 
SAP). In high-risk populations, some individuals with mild valvular 
changes do indeed have RHD (and are at risk of disease progression), 
whereas the mild changes in other individuals might be classified as 
being normal. Of note, individuals might oscillate between these two 
classifications. The stage-based criteria outlined in these guidelines 
acknowledge the spectrum of early echocardiographic rheumatic 
changes by incorporating the assessment of the risk of progression and 
replacing the previously described borderline and definite categories7 
(Fig. 1 and Box 3).
A prediction score reported in 2019 using the parameters in the 
WHF 2012 echocardiographic criteria (anterior mitral valve thickening, 
excessive mitral leaflet motion, regurgitant mitral jet >2.0 cm, irregular 
aortic valve thickening and any aortic regurgitation) showed good dis-
crimination and calibration for a diagnosis of RHD (c-statistic of 0.998 
and 0.994, respectively) and good discrimination for predicting disease 
Table 2 | Recommendations for at-risk populations, equipment use and task sharing for rheumatic heart disease screening
Recommendations
Class of 
recommendation
Level of 
evidence
Screening for RHD in high-risk settings
Consider RHD echocardiographic active case finding in children and young adults aged 5–20 years living in endemic 
regions2,4,6,34,52
2A
B
Consider RHD echocardiographic active case finding in first-degree relatives of index cases53–55
2A
B
Consider RHD echocardiographic active case finding in pregnant women56 and young adults (aged 21–39 years) living in endemic 
regions
2B
B
Confirmatory criteria should be applied for active case finding in individuals aged > 20 years, given that there is limited evidence 
to support the use of the screening criteria in this population7
2A
B
Equipment use
Hand-held echocardiogram devices are a reasonable alternative option for echocardiographic RHD screening18–22
2A
B–NR
Task sharing for active case finding in endemic regions
A structured training programme for teaching non-experts to perform echocardiography screening to facilitate task sharing is 
recommended28,68,75
1
B
Abbreviated diagnostic criteria and echocardiography protocols can be applied for task sharing18,28,65,68
2A
B
Expert supervision and review of non-expert images should be provided before a diagnosis is made28
2A
B/C
Use of technology to improve care
Telemedicine can improve education of RHD and related topics for health-care providers, school staff, screening teams and the 
general population
1
C
Telemedicine and dedicated cloud-based computing systems are helpful for remote upload, storage and interpretation of images 
and tests69
1
C
Tele-echocardiography can aid in task sharing for active echocardiographic case finding in RHD-endemic regions70
2B
C
NR, non-randomized; RHD, rheumatic heart disease.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
256
Evidence-based guidelines
progression (c-statistic of 0.811)10. The score has been externally vali-
dated in international cohorts and has been recalibrated for refinement. 
The scoring system assigned point values to different variables that were 
proportional to their regression coefficients and stratified the sum of 
these values into low (0–6), intermediate (7–9) and high (≥10) risk catego-
ries of early RHD progression10. By risk-stratifying individuals with RHD 
at diagnosis, the score has potential value for deciding which patients 
will benefit most from close clinical monitoring and SAP36,37. In keeping 
with the features of this score and the corresponding level of risk of dis-
ease progression, as well as to reflect early RHD as a continuum instead 
of using distinct diagnostic categories, we present a staging system 
(stages A–D) for RHD as detected by echocardiography. The criteria to 
meet these stages and the risk of disease progression are shown in Box 7.
Stage A. Stage A indicates the presence of early valvular changes that 
meet the minimum diagnostic criteria for RHD in a high-prevalence 
population. Stage A is only applicable to individuals aged 20 years 
or less. On the basis of the risk score, individuals with stage A disease 
might be at risk of developing valvular heart disease, but are consid-
ered to have a low risk of disease progression. This stage A category 
corresponds to the disease stage previously known as ‘borderline 
RHD’7, but better acknowledges the continuum of echocardiographic 
features from normal variant to mild RHD. Of note, the presence of 
morphological features alone, without valvular regurgitation, does 
not qualify individuals for stage A disease, given that the presence 
of morphological features alone is observed only in a small number of 
individuals and is considered unlikely to be associated with the 
development of RHD.
Stage B. Stage B indicates mild RHD with the presence of both path-
ological regurgitation and morphological features. The presence 
of both aortic and mitral pathological regurgitation, but without 
morphological features, is also classified as stage B, given that the 
concurrence of pathological mitral and aortic regurgitation is prob-
ably indicative of true pathology. Patients with stage B disease are 
considered to have a moderate or high risk of disease progression on 
the basis of the risk score10 and correspond to the previous category 
named ‘definite RHD’ (Box 3).
Stage C. Stage C indicates established valvular disease detected by 
echocardiography, and patients with stage C disease are at risk of 
developing complications and might require medical treatment or 
surgical intervention. Mitral stenosis of any severity is included in 
this category.
Stage D. Stage D indicates established valvular disease detected 
by echocardiography (the same as stage C), but with overt clinical 
complications (such as heart failure, arrhythmia, stroke or the need 
for cardiac surgery).
Limitations of diagnostic criteria
Screening criteria. The screening criteria have been developed for 
ease and speed of application and are highly sensitive, but have a lower 
specificity than the confirmatory criteria. This compromise is accept-
able for a screening test, given the need for a simplified set of criteria 
that can easily be applied in settings with limited resources and poor 
access to specialized care and advanced imaging modalities.
Confirmatory criteria. The limitations of the current confirmatory cri-
teria are essentially unchanged from those described by the WHF 2012 
guidelines7. However, the challenge of applying morphological features 
as a criterion has been addressed in this revision. The addition of the 
body weight-based measurements also addresses concerns about 
the under-reporting of pathological mitral regurgitation in younger 
children. The confirmatory criteria are detailed and are best applied 
by experts with advanced training on RHD diagnosis and with access 
to full-capacity echocardiogram machines. Although these criteria 
are appropriate for use in well-resourced settings, their application in 
certain resource-poor, RHD-endemic regions might be limited.
Furthermore, the comprehensive criteria do not include quantita-
tive severity grading using measurements such as vena contracta, the 
proximal isovelocity surface area and the effective regurgitant orifice 
area. These measurements can be challenging to obtain in rheumatic 
valve lesions with eccentric regurgitant jets14. Any quantitative or 
qualitative evaluation of severity should remain in line with interna-
tional guidelines on the echocardiographic assessment of valvular 
heart disease15,16.
Exclusion of aortic stenosis and right-sided valve lesions from the 
diagnostic criteria. Neither the screening criteria nor the compre-
hensive criteria include the presence of aortic stenosis or right-sided 
cardiac valve lesions. As stated in the WHF 2012 guidelines7, rheumatic 
Box 4
Screening criteria in individuals 
aged ≤20 years
Screening criteria for the echocardiographic detection of rheumatic 
heart disease in individuals aged ≤20 years.
MR (requires all the following)
•
• In individuals weighing <30 kg: MR jet length ≥ 1.5 cm; in 
individuals weighing ≥ 30 kg: MR jet length ≥ 2.0 cma
•
• MR jet is observed in at least one view
•
• MR jet is observed in at least two consecutive frames
AR (requires all the following)
•
• Any AR
•
• Observed in at least one view
•
• Observed in at least two consecutive frames
Mitral stenosis
•
• Restricted leaflet motion with reduced valve opening
Positive screen
•
• Presence of any of the defined MR, AR or MS
Negative screen
•
• Absence of any of the defined MR, AR or MS
AR, aortic regurgitation; MR, mitral regurgitation; MS, mitral stenosis. aCut-off 
value is derived from expert consensus. If weight is not available, an age 
cut-off of <10 years or ≥10 years can be applied.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
257
Evidence-based guidelines
aortic valve stenosis is rare in isolation, especially in the absence 
of mitral valve involvement38–40. Similarly, isolated involvement of 
right-sided cardiac valves — most notably tricuspid regurgitation — 
in the absence of mitral valve disease that leads to right ventricu-
lar dysfunction is an equally unusual finding, especially during 
screening41. Consequently, we have maintained the decision not to 
include these valve lesions in the minimum diagnostic criteria outlined 
in these guidelines.
Age-based and weight-based cut-offs for mitral regurgitation jet 
length. There are limited data on the use of mitral regurgitation 
jet length as a diagnostic criterion for RHD because it is not routinely 
included in paediatric echocardiography guidelines. However, in stud-
ies comparing left atrial size with body surface area and reporting on 
nomograms that have compared patient age and weight with body sur-
face area, there is a demonstrable inflexion point where body surface 
area = 1 m2, which corresponds closely to an age of 9.5 years and weight 
of 27–30 kg42,43. These data have resulted in a consensus decision to use 
weight < 30 kg or age < 10 years as thresholds for a smaller mitral regur-
gitation length cut-off. Ideally, mitral regurgitation jet length should 
correlate with patient size or left atrial size as a continuous variable, 
but this criterion is not practical for guidelines in RHD-endemic set-
tings. Therefore, these guidelines recommend the use of 1.5 cm as the 
cut-off value for patients weighing <30 kg or aged <10 years, for whom 
shorter mitral regurgitation jet lengths might indicate true rheumatic 
involvement, especially when smaller atrial sizes are anticipated. Our 
expert opinion is that the lower cut-off value will prevent the under-
diagnosis of RHD in patients weighing < 30 kg or aged <10 years who 
would otherwise meet the criteria for pathological mitral regurgitation. 
We believe that the underdiagnosis of younger patients is a more 
pressing concern than overdiagnosis in RHD-endemic regions.
RHD care implications
The care pathways in these guidelines have been differentiated accord-
ing to the disease stage, using best-available evidence. Data from a 
randomized, controlled trial demonstrated that SAP reduced the risk 
of RHD progression in children aged 5–17 years with stage A or stage B 
disease4, with the number needed to treat to prevent one case of RHD 
progression being 13. However, the adverse effects associated with 
SAP, including stigmatization, reduced quality of life, allergic reac-
tions and anaphylaxis44,45, in addition to numerous health-system fac-
tors, should be considered before the roll-out of large-scale treatment 
programmes4. Consequently, there is a need to account for family and 
clinician decisions and health-system factors before recommending 
SAP in individuals aged ≤20 years with stage A RHD who are at low risk of 
RHD progression. However, all children with stage A disease must have 
access to follow-up echocardiography and longitudinal clinical evalu-
ation to monitor for disease progression. We recommend that SAP be 
continued until a follow-up echocardiogram has been obtained. SAP is 
recommended for all individuals aged ≤20 years with stage B disease, 
who have a moderate-to-high risk of disease progression. Finally, SAP 
is recommended for all individuals with stage C or stage D disease and 
the treatment regimen should follow relevant local RHD management 
guidelines. In certain circumstances, such as for individuals without 
access to a comprehensive echocardiogram report, SAP can be com-
menced after the criteria for a positive screen have been fulfilled. 
However, the decision on whether to start SAP should be made with 
advice from a clinician with RHD experience and all efforts should 
be made to receive a formal diagnosis with a confirmatory criteria 
echocardiogram as soon as feasibly possible. These recommendations 
are summarized in Table 1.
Active case finding
Active case finding refers to active surveillance or screening for disease 
in at-risk populations within and outside health-care facilities46,47. Active 
case finding for RHD encompasses both coordinated population-based 
screening programmes and opportunistic case detection in clinical 
settings. Active case finding for RHD uses echocardiography to iden-
tify valvular changes that are consistent with RHD in individuals with-
out a history of ARF and/or RHD. Active case finding can identify a 
spectrum of valvular changes that are associated with a variable risk 
of disease progression. Over the past decade, the RHD clinical and 
research communities have recognized the importance of active case 
finding to detect mild disease in patients who might benefit from the 
commencement of SAP and close clinical follow-up4, as well as patients 
with moderate or severe disease who require advanced medical and 
surgical interventions.
Box 5
Confirmatory criteria for 
pathological valve dysfunction
Pathological (at least mild) MR (all criteria must be met)
•
• Observed in at least two views
•
• Observed in at least one view, MR jet length measures ≥ 1.5 cm 
(in individuals weighing < 30 kg) or ≥ 2.0 cm (in individuals 
weighing ≥ 30 kg)a,b
•
• Velocity ≥ 3.0 m/s for one complete envelopec,d
•
• Pan-systolic jet in at least one enveloped,e
Pathological (at least mild) AR (all criteria must be met)
•
• Observed in at least two views
•
• Observed in at least one view, AR jet length ≥ 1.0 cmb
•
• Velocity ≥ 3.0 m/s in early diastoled
•
• Pan-diastolic jet in at least one enveloped
Mitral stenosis (all criteria must be met)f
•
• Restricted leaflet motion with reduced valve opening
•
• Mean peak gradient ≥ 4.0 mmHg
Other common causes of mild valvular regurgitation, including mitral valve 
prolapse and bicuspid aortic valve, should be excluded before diagnosing 
rheumatic heart disease. AR, aortic regurgitation; MR, mitral regurgitation. 
aCut-off value is derived from expert consensus. If weight is not available, an 
age cut-off of ≤10 years or >10 years can be applied. bA regurgitant jet length 
should be measured from the vena contracta to the last pixel of regurgitant 
colour (blue or red). cBody of the pan-systolic envelope should be ≥3.0 m/s. 
dSeparate colour wave Doppler traces can be used in different views to docu­
ment the pan-systolic or pan-diastolic envelope and jet velocity. eGiven the 
difficulty in aligning spectral Doppler imaging through eccentric regurgitant 
jets, it is reasonable to use an appearance of a jet being pan-systolic on the 
basis of qualitative assessment, such as a colour jet observed through­out 
systole. fTwo-dimensional evidence of the reduced mitral valve orifice area  
is adequate when spectral Doppler imaging is unavailable.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
258
Evidence-based guidelines
RHD meets much of the criteria necessary for conducting 
population-based screening33,48,49, albeit with some limitations 
(Table 3). Population-based echocardiography screening for RHD is 
resource-demanding. All prospective screening programmes should 
consider the economic and ethical considerations relevant to that 
specific jurisdiction, including the effect of the programme on other 
strategies aimed at addressing the burden of RHD50. The current guide-
lines specifically provide evidence-based guidance on diagnosing RHD 
by echocardiography that is relevant to various active case-finding 
strategies. However, the ultimate decision to conduct population-based 
screening should take into account all other relevant factors and 
be made by local government and health organizations. Further 
guidance on population-based screening is outlined subsequently.
Population-based screening for RHD
Candidates. Echocardiography-based screening should be considered 
only in high-risk populations, as defined by a prevalence of more than 
2 cases per 1,000 persons for RHD (all ages) or an incidence of more 
than 30 cases per 100,000 persons aged 5–14 years annually for ARF3,51. 
Children with no history of ARF (but a presumed subclinical episode) 
who have developed RHD have the most to gain from the prevention of 
disease progression. Therefore, most screening programmes for RHD 
in endemic regions have been undertaken in children and young adults 
aged 5–20 years2,6,34,52. Targeted screening of individuals at an increased 
risk of RHD, such as siblings (aged 5–20 years) and parents of index 
cases with ARF or RHD, might also be appropriate53–55. The screening 
of young adults could still be justified for local disease burden manage-
ment, especially in socially vulnerable and high-prevalence settings. 
Given the substantial risk of undiagnosed RHD to pregnant women and 
the fetus, echocardiography screening is also reasonable in pregnant 
women at high risk of RHD, including those living in endemic regions56. 
These recommendations are summarized in Table 2.
Ethical considerations. Evidence shows that echocardiographic 
screening combined with SAP for early-stage RHD is more cost-effective 
than the use of primary prophylaxis for ARF57. However, the decision 
to invest in echocardiographic RHD active case-finding programmes 
at the expense of other competing health problems with robust 
evidence-based interventions remains an ethical dilemma, particularly 
in resource-limited settings58. Population-based screening could lead 
to increased utilization of the already overstretched infrastructure 
and requires providers to care for more individuals, as well as affecting 
the quality of life of patients and their families59. Although a negative 
screening result seems to have no adverse effect, a positive screen that 
might actually be a misdiagnosis can result in stigmatization, unneces-
sary anxiety, inappropriate SAP use, changes in physical activity levels 
and a reduction in the quality of life of the individual and their family60,61. 
With these potential harms in mind, implementing population-based 
screening programmes necessitates the education of health-care 
professionals about the potential risks and benefits of screening. All 
programmes should ensure sustainability and the availability of rec-
ommended treatment, including SAP and clinical follow-up, for all 
high-risk individuals, regardless of socio-economic status. This require-
ment might be even more important in low-resource settings, in which 
clinical care is prioritized on the basis of disease risk. Furthermore, 
individuals should be enrolled in a local RHD registry, if available, and 
the cost of screening should be balanced against potential expenditure 
on medical care and its effect on other public health strategies57,62,63.
Echocardiography in acute carditis
Diagnosis of carditis in an index ARF case. A detailed description of 
echocardiographic findings in ARF is outside the scope of these guide-
lines and has been reviewed previously51. Carditis in the setting of ARF 
has been described as pancarditis involving the endocardium, myocar-
dium and pericardium. Only endocarditis and, more specifically, valve 
Box 6
Confirmatory morphological 
features of rheumatic heart 
disease
Morphological characteristics of the mitral valve
•
• Valve apparatus thickening (defined by the presence of either  
or both):
-- Anterior leaflet thickeninga,b
-- Chordal thickeningc
•
• Valve mobility abnormalities (defined by the presence of either 
or both):
-- Restricted anterior or posterior leaflet motion in diastoled
-- Excessive anterior leaflet tip motion during systolee
Morphological features of the aortic valve
•
• Cusp thickeningf
•
• Cusp prolapse
•
• Restricted cusp motion
•
• Coaptation defect in diastole
aAnterior mitral valve leaflet (AMVL) thickness should be measured during 
diastole at the full excursion. Measurement should be taken at the thickest 
portion of the leaflet, including focal thickening, beading and nodularity. 
Ideally, the measurement should be performed on a frame with maximal 
separation of chordae from the leaflet tissue. bAbnormal thickening of 
the AMVL is age-specific and defined as follows: ≥3.0 mm for individuals 
aged ≤20 years, ≥4.0 mm for individuals aged 21–40 years and ≥5.0 mm for 
individuals aged > 40 years. cChordal thickening might range from individual 
chordae tendineae to multiple chordae tendineae fusion and calcification. 
The structures of papillary muscles, chordae tendineae and margins of 
leaflets might not be clearly distinguishable. Assessment is subjective; 
however, in most cases, chordal thickening is attributable to fusion of 
two or more chordae and is seen as an echo-bright structure near to the 
leaflet tip insertion. Chordal thickening is typically associated with other 
morphological features. dRestricted leaflet motion of either the AMVL or the 
posterior mitral valve leaflet is usually the result of chordal shortening or 
fusion, commissural fusion or leaflet thickening. eExcessive leaflet tip motion 
results from elongation of the primary chords and is defined as displacement 
of the tip or edge of an involved leaflet towards the left atrium, resulting in 
abnormal coaptation and regurgitation. Excessive leaflet tip motion does 
not need to meet the standard echocardiographic definition of mitral valve 
prolapse disease, given that they refer to different disease processes7. This 
characteristic applies only to those aged <35 years. fIn the parasternal 
short-axis view, the right and non-coronary aortic cusp closure line often 
presents as echogenic (thickened) in healthy individuals, which should be 
considered normal. Image optimization for valve thickness and morphology, 
including harmonic imaging, should be individualized on the basis of 
echocardiography devices and those performing echocardiograms.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
259
Evidence-based guidelines
dysfunction (valvulitis) are considered major criteria for the diagnosis 
of carditis51. To meet the diagnostic definitions for a major criterion of 
carditis, pathological mitral and/or aortic regurgitation must be pre-
sent (as defined in Box 5). Valvular regurgitation in ARF is attributable 
to various mechanisms, including valvulitis, mitral annular dilatation, 
leaflet prolapse and chordal elongation or rupture, all of which can be 
detected on echocardiography64. The morphological changes associ-
ated with RHD often develop at a later stage of disease or might never 
transpire and thus are not required for the diagnosis of acute carditis 
in the setting of ARF.
Diagnosis of acute carditis in the setting of RHD. The differentia-
tion between acute valvulitis and established RHD can pose a clini-
cal dilemma. No evidence exists for the use of echocardiography to 
differentiate between acute-on-chronic valvulitis and chronic RHD. 
Echocardiography cannot accurately measure when the rheumatic 
changes occurred, but a comparison with previous echocardiograms 
to assess the severity and progression of the valve lesions might be 
useful in determining whether there is acute valve inflammation in the 
setting of an ARF recurrence.
Echocardiography equipment
Hand-held echocardiogram devices. The development of hand-held 
echocardiography devices and improvements in their image quality 
and functionality have resulted in hand-held devices being a credible 
option for echocardiographic diagnosis of RHD65. All available hand-held 
devices allow for standard 2D and colour Doppler imaging. The probes 
of the hand-held devices weigh approximately 130–400 g, making 
them light enough for comfortable use in clinical practice and active 
case-finding settings. The phased array (cardiac) probe ‘footprint’ is small 
enough to obtain images from most acoustic windows. The hand-held 
machines can have high frame rates: approximately 40–50 frames/s for 
2D imaging and up to 30 frames/s for colour Doppler imaging, depend-
ing on the image optimization capacity. The depth (up to 30 cm) and 
field of view of hand-held devices are adequate for appropriate image 
acquisition and analysis, and some devices now feature pulsed-wave 
and continuous-wave Doppler. In addition, certain devices now pro-
vide built-in training software, such as artificial intelligence (AI)-guided 
image acquisition or options to provide real-time teleguidance66,67.
However, hand-held devices have numerous limitations, including 
minimal manual image optimization capacity (with most devices now 
allowing harmonic imaging to be manually turned off), low colour scale 
and the absence of spectral Doppler imaging. Of note, all these factors 
associated with hand-held devices can impede the application of the 
WHF 2023 criteria. Furthermore, the functionality of the hand-held 
devices varies depending on the specific device characteristics, including 
battery life, recharge time, memory capabilities, cloud-based file-sharing 
capacity and the standardization of file types and temperature.
Hand-held echocardiography devices are substantially cheaper 
than portable ultrasonography machines and currently cost between 
US $2,000 and US $10,000. Many hand-held devices are sold as 
stand-alone probes that use widely available, non-brand-specific tab-
lets, allowing operators to use larger screens, which improves disease 
detection. Finally, hand-held devices are now capable of secure image 
Box 7
Staging of rheumatic heart disease detected by 
echocardiographya,b
Stage A: minimal echocardiographic criteria for RHD
•
• Applies only to individuals aged ≤20 years old
•
• Clinical risk: might be at risk of valvular heart disease progression
•
• Echocardiographic features: the presence of mildc MR or AR 
without morphological features
Stage B: mild RHD
•
• Can apply to any age
•
• Clinical risk: at moderate or high risk of progression and at risk of 
developing symptoms of valvular heart disease
•
• Echocardiographic features: evidence of mildc valvular 
regurgitation plus at least one morphological feature in individuals 
aged ≤20 years and at least two morphological features in 
individuals aged > 20 yearsd; or mild regurgitation in both mitral 
and aortic valves
Stage C: advanced RHD at risk of clinical complications
•
• Can apply to any age
•
• Clinical risk: at high risk of developing clinical complications that 
require medical or surgical intervention
•
• Echocardiographic features: moderate or severe MR, moderate or 
severe AR, any MS or ASe, pulmonary hypertension and decreased 
LV systolic function
Stage D: advanced RHD with clinical complications
•
• Can apply to any age
•
• Clinical risk: established clinical complications include cardiac 
surgery, heart failure, arrhythmia, stroke and infective endocarditis
•
• Echocardiographic features: moderate or severe MR, moderate or 
severe AR, any MS or ASe, pulmonary hypertension and decreased  
LV systolic function
AR, aortic regurgitation; AS, aortic stenosis; LV, left ventricular; MR, mitral regurgitation; MS, mitral stenosis, RHD, rheumatic heart disease. aTo be applied in 
high-risk settings3,51 and requires other causes of valvular heart disease to have been excluded. bAfter the application of the confirmatory echocardiographic 
criteria, diagnostic categories might include ‘normal’ and ‘other’, which encompasses other diseases such as congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathies and 
pericardial effusion. cFulfilling the confirmatory criteria for pathological regurgitation (Box 4). dThis cut-off value is derived from expert consensus. eAortic stenosis 
is defined in accordance with international guidelines on valvular heart disease. A diagnosis of rheumatic aortic stenosis requires the exclusion of other causes, 
including bicuspid aortic valve and degenerative calcific AS.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
260
Evidence-based guidelines
upload and storage. Some brands will host their specific study stor-
age options, with limited and proprietary file formats, whereas most 
devices can upload Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine 
(DICOM) formats to non-brand-specific image storage servers.
Portable echocardiogram machines with complete functional-
ity. Portable echocardiography machines are still the mainstay in 
many RHD active case-finding programmes. Unfortunately, these 
machines are expensive and thus not accessible in resource-limited 
settings. In addition to producing high-quality 2D, colour Doppler and 
continuous-wave Doppler imaging, these portable devices have many 
extra functions (including global longitudinal strain, automated ejec-
tion fraction, stress and 3D imaging), which might not be necessary for 
RHD detection alone. The recommendations regarding equipment 
for RHD screening are summarized in Table 2.
Task sharing in RHD-endemic regions
RHD remains prevalent in many low-income and middle-income 
regions, where there are relatively few cardiologists and cardiac 
sonographers per capita compared with high-income countries, as 
well as a substantial disparity in health-care resources between rural 
and urban regions. An alternative workforce is crucial to the success 
of population-based active case-finding programmes for RHD in these 
areas. Task sharing involves strategically redistributing skills or tasks 
among teams and personnel. Task sharing for RHD active case-finding 
using echocardiography has been shown to be successful27,28 and might 
be a realistic and cost-effective alternative strategy for active case find-
ing. Studies have shown that non-experts can acquire and interpret 
basic echocardiographic images after brief standardized training, even 
using limited single-view protocols, and achieve a moderate-to-high 
sensitivity and specificity18,28,65,68. A structured, coordinated and 
preferably regionally accredited training programme for task sharing 
is recommended. Furthermore, continuous monitoring and evalu-
ation are vital to the task-sharing process. Discussions with health 
authorities and medical councils might also be required, given that 
the regulations in some locations might limit the task sharing of ultra-
sonography responsibilities to non-physicians. The recommendations 
for task sharing for active case finding in RHD-endemic regions are 
summarized in Table 2.
New and emerging technology
RHD active case-finding programmes can benefit from advances 
in medical technology. Echocardiographic images have been suc-
cessfully transmitted to experts at an off-site location for analysis 
and interpretation using cloud-based image storage and viewing 
platforms (tele-echocardiography)69. Task sharing in screening pro-
grammes has also been improved by the miniaturization of ultra-
sonography devices, the increase in image quality and battery life, 
and the incorporation of dedicated cloud applications and advances 
features, such as Doppler and probe guidance applications and live 
videoconferencing70. In addition, a clinical trial has tested the utility of 
smartphone-connected, wireless devices, including pocket echocar-
diography, in a mobile health clinic to improve outcomes for patients 
with RHD and other structural heart diseases71. Compared with stand-
ard care, initial mobile health assessment resulted in a shorter time to 
diagnosis, increased the probability of referral for advanced surgical 
care and reduced the risk of adverse outcomes (hospitalization or 
death) at follow-up71. These findings show the potential of integrating 
technological devices for point-of-care management, especially in 
resource-limited settings71.
Table 3 | Suitability of population screening for rheumatic heart disease using echocardiography
Criteria
Criteria met? (level of evidence)
Remaining knowledge gaps
The condition should be an 
important public health problem
Yes (level B–NR)1
The published data are probably an under-estimation of the 
true global burden of disease, given the scarcity or absolute 
lack of data from some low-income regions
There should be a recognizable 
latent or early symptomatic stage
Yes (level B–NR)76,77
None
The natural history of the condition, 
including development from latent 
to declared disease, should be 
adequately understood
We have gained a better understanding of the natural history 
of latent RHD over the past decade (level B–NR)8,35,78–82
The longest cohort study had a follow-up of 5 years82. 
Longer follow-up studies are required to elucidate the 
long-term evolution of the disease
There should be an accepted 
treatment for patients with 
recognized disease
The GOAL trial4 provided evidence that SAP prevents the 
progression of latent RHD to more advanced stages of 
the disease over a period of 2 years (level B–R)
The duration of SAP administration remains undefined. In 
particular, data to support the cessation of SAP for children 
with latent RHD who show echocardiographic normalization 
in follow-up studies are lacking
There should be a suitable test or 
examination that has a high level 
of accuracy
Yes, but with limitations. Echocardiography is non-invasive 
and is readily available, but the 2012 WHF echocardiographic 
diagnostic criteria were not easy to apply at scale (owing 
to technical and personnel reasons) for population-level 
screening32. This revision of the guidelines has aimed to 
address these challenges (level B–NR)
Need to test the performance of these revised criteria as 
they are applied in clinical and research practice
The test should be acceptable 
to the population
Yes (level B–NR)83,84
Further studies required of the potential harms 
of screening85
There should be an agreed policy 
on whom to treat as patients
Yes, regional and national guidelines are available (level 
B–NR)
There has not been an update on the international treatment 
guidelines for RHD since the publication of the GOAL trial4. 
The current guidelines provide guidance with varying levels 
of evidence, but recommendations need to be refined
NR, non-randomized; R, randomized; RHD, rheumatic heart disease; SAP, secondary antibiotic prophylaxis.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
261
Evidence-based guidelines
Preliminary data have been published on the use of AI technology 
to improve automated RHD diagnosis in clinical practice. A Brazilian 
study showed that a deep learning approach had moderate accuracy 
(72.8%, 95% CI 69.3–76.3%) for flagging latent RHD in screening images 
acquired using hand-held devices, with better accuracy for definite 
RHD72,73. AI algorithms have also successfully identified and quanti-
fied mitral regurgitation in children, a key feature for RHD diagnosis 
in screening studies74. A novel AI approach for computer-assisted 
auscultation showed low sensitivity (4.0%) but reasonable specificity 
(93.7%) for RHD detection compared with echocardiography22. Finally, 
AI-based software has been newly incorporated into echocardiogram 
devices to guide optimal probe positioning and to facilitate imaging 
acquisition66, and AI systems are currently being trained specifically to 
diagnose RHD. Therefore, although data are still scarce, AI technology 
holds promise for future development and incorporation into RHD 
diagnostic flowcharts. A list of recommendations for the use of new 
technology to detect RHD is presented in Table 2.
Future directions
Validation studies are essential to determine the utility of the new 
WHF 2023 criteria in communities. Although the abbreviated cri-
teria aim to simplify the echocardiographic screening of RHD, an 
adequate balance of sensitivity and specificity must be maintained. 
Therefore, a series of studies are essential to assess whether these 
criteria are sensitive enough to detect most RHD and, at the same 
time, maintain adequate specificity. In addition, research is needed 
to validate and strengthen the age-specific and size-specific recom-
mendations and further characterize the use of rheumatic regurgitant 
jet length as a criterion, to improve our capacity to distinguish pathol-
ogy from physiology. Furthermore, continued efforts are required to 
ensure that the diagnostic criteria can best identify those individuals 
who will benefit the most from SAP.
In addition, the performance of the newer portable echocardiog-
raphy devices should also be evaluated, as well as the new applications 
for imaging guidance, off-site review of images and automated flag-
ging of abnormalities. AI technology for the diagnosis of RHD should 
continue to be developed.
Finally, cost–effectiveness and implementation research are 
required to determine the sustainability of various models of RHD 
active case finding. Guidance on the threshold for implementing active 
case finding is needed, as well as guidance on the ideal age for screening 
children. Furthermore, active case-finding programmes might have a 
role in evaluating vaccine efficacy and safety.
Conclusions
The WHF 2023 guidelines for the echocardiographic diagnosis of RHD 
provides a contemporary resource for researchers and health-care prac-
titioners in RHD-endemic regions around the world. These guidelines 
provide an updated, evidence-based set of criteria for diagnosing RHD, 
which empowers clinicians to make management decisions on the basis 
of the risk of an individual of disease progression. These diagnostic 
criteria support the growing demand for task sharing, particularly in 
resource-limited settings, and complement local, national and inter-
national RHD treatment recommendations. In revising the guidelines, 
we have also identified areas for future research, including continued 
evaluation of the applicability of this new set of criteria in research and 
clinical settings to ensure that it remains relevant to end-users.
Published online: 2 November 2023
References
1.	
Watkins, D. A. et al. Global, regional, and national burden of rheumatic heart disease, 
1990–2015. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 713–722 (2017).
2.	
Francis, J. R. et al. Hyperendemic rheumatic heart disease in a remote Australian town 
identified by echocardiographic screening. Med. J. Aust. 213, 118–123 (2020).
3.	
Carapetis, J. R., Steer, A. C., Mulholland, E. K. & Weber, M. The global burden of group  
A streptococcal diseases. Lancet Infect. Dis. 5, 685–694 (2005).
4.	
Beaton, A. et al. Secondary antibiotic prophylaxis for latent rheumatic heart disease.  
N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 230–240 (2022).
5.	
Watkins, D. A. et al. Rheumatic heart disease worldwide: JACC scientific expert panel.  
J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 72, 1397–1416 (2018).
6.	
Roberts, K. V., Brown, A. D., Maguire, G. P., Atkinson, D. N. & Carapetis, J. R. Utility of 
auscultatory screening for detecting rheumatic heart disease in high-risk children in 
Australia’s Northern Territory. Med. J. Aust. 199, 196–199 (2013).
7.	
Reményi, B. et al. World Heart Federation criteria for echocardiographic diagnosis of 
rheumatic heart disease — an evidence-based guideline. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 9, 297–309 
(2012).
8.	
Beaton, A. et al. Latent rheumatic heart disease: outcomes 2 years after echocardiographic 
detection. Pediatr. Cardiol. 35, 1259–1267 (2014).
9.	
Rémond, M. et al. Are minor echocardiographic changes associated with an increased 
risk of acute rheumatic fever or progression to rheumatic heart disease? Int. J. Cardiol. 
198, 117–122 (2015).
10.	
Nunes, M. C. P. et al. Simplified echocardiography screening criteria for diagnosing and 
predicting progression of latent rheumatic heart disease. Circ. Cardiovasc. Imaging 12, 
e007928 (2019).
11.	
Engelman, D. et al. Screening for rheumatic heart disease: quality and agreement of 
focused cardiac ultrasound by briefly trained health workers. BMC Cardiovasc. Disord. 
16, 30 (2016).
12.	
Francis, J. R. et al. Single-view echocardiography by nonexpert practitioners to detect 
rheumatic heart disease: a prospective study of diagnostic accuracy. Circ. Cardiovasc. 
Imaging 14, e011790 (2021).
13.	
Beaton, A. et al. Task-shifting of handheld echocardiographic screening for rheumatic 
heart disease: longitudinal performance of non-experts in a school-based program. 
Glob. Heart 11, e19 (2016).
14.	
Pandian, N. G. et al. Recommendations for the use of echocardiography in the evaluation 
of rheumatic heart disease: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography.  
J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 36, 3–28 (2023).
15.	
Otto, C. M. et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients with  
valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  
Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 143, 
e72–e227 (2021).
16.	
Vahanian, A. et al. ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular heart  
disease: developed by the Task Force for the management of valvular heart disease 
of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Association for 
Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur. Heart J. 43, 561–632 (2021).
17.	
Jacobs, A. K. et al. ACCF/AHA clinical practice guideline methodology summit report. 
Circulation 127, 268–310 (2013).
18.	
Diamantino, A. et al. A focussed single-view hand-held echocardiography protocol  
for the detection of rheumatic heart disease. Cardiol. Young 28, 108–117 (2018).
19.	
Beaton, A. et al. The utility of handheld echocardiography for early rheumatic  
heart disease diagnosis: a field study. Eur. Heart J. Cardiovasc. Imaging 16, 475–482 
(2015).
20.	 Lu, J. C. et al. Simplified rheumatic heart disease screening criteria for handheld 
echocardiography. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 28, 463–469 (2015).
21.	
Remenyi, B. et al. Single parasternal-long-axis-view-sweep screening echocardiographic 
protocol to detect rheumatic heart disease: a prospective study of diagnostic accuracy. 
Heart Lung Circ. 29, 859–866 (2020).
22.	 Zühlke, L. J., Engel, M. E., Nkepu, S. & Mayosi, B. M. Evaluation of a focussed  
protocol for hand-held echocardiography and computer-assisted auscultation in 
detecting latent rheumatic heart disease in scholars. Cardiol. Young 26, 1097–1106 
(2016).
23.	 Beaton, A. et al. Improving the practicality of echocardiographic screening for  
rheumatic heart disease: performance of non-expert users following completion of a 
standardized computer-based training curriculum [abstract]. Circulation 132, A18811 
(2015).
24.	 Carapetis, J. R. et al. Evaluation of a screening protocol using auscultation and portable 
echocardiography to detect asymptomatic rheumatic heart disease in Tongan 
schoolchildren. Nat. Clin. Pract. Cardiovasc. Med. 5, 411–417 (2008).
25.	 Bacquelin, R. et al. Echocardiography-based screening for rheumatic heart disease: what 
does borderline mean? Int. J. Cardiol. 203, 1003–1004 (2016).
26.	 Scheel, A. et al. The inter-rater reliability and individual reviewer performance of the 
2012 World Heart Federation guidelines for the echocardiographic diagnosis of latent 
rheumatic heart disease. Int. J. Cardiol. 328, 146–151 (2021).
27.	
Engelman, D. et al. Focused cardiac ultrasound screening for rheumatic heart disease 
by briefly trained health workers: a study of diagnostic accuracy. Lancet Glob. Health 4, 
e386–e394 (2016).
28.	 Francis, J. R. et al. Abbreviated echocardiographic screening for rheumatic heart  
disease by nonexperts with and without offsite expert review: a diagnostic accuracy 
study. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 36, 733–745 (2023).
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
262
Evidence-based guidelines
29.	 Webb, R. H. et al. Valvular regurgitation using portable echocardiography in a healthy 
student population: implications for rheumatic heart disease screening. J. Am. Soc. 
Echocardiogr. 28, 981–988 (2015).
30.	 Clark, B. C. et al. Using a low-risk population to estimate the specificity of the World Heart 
Federation criteria for the diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 
29, 253–258 (2016).
31.	
Roberts, K. et al. What is normal? Echocardiographic findings in low-risk children  
living in a region with high rates of rheumatic heart disease. Circulation 125, e723  
(2012).
32.	 Remenyi, B. et al. Inter-rater and intra-rater reliability and agreement of 
echocardiographic diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease using the World Heart 
Federation evidence-based criteria. Heart Asia 11, e011233 (2019).
33.	 World Health Organization. Screening Programmes: A Short Guide. Increase 
Effectiveness, Maximize Benefits and Minimize Harm (WHO, 2020).
34.	 Beaton, A. et al. The utility of handheld echocardiography for early diagnosis of 
rheumatic heart disease. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 27, 42–49 (2014).
35.	 Saxena, A. et al. Prevalence and outcome of subclinical rheumatic heart disease in India: 
the RHEUMATIC (Rheumatic Heart Echo Utilisation Monit Actuarial Trends Indian Child) 
study. Heart 97, 2018–2022 (2011).
36.	 Nascimento, B. R. et al. Outcomes of echocardiography-detected rheumatic heart 
disease: validating a simplified score in cohorts from different countries. J. Am. Heart 
Assoc. 10, e021622 (2021).
37.	
Bechtlufft, B. M. et al. Validation of a simplified score for predicting latent rheumatic 
heart disease progression using a prospective cohort of Brazilian schoolchildren.  
BMJ Open. 10, e036827 (2020).
38.	 Alkhalifa, M., Ibrahim, S. & Osman, S. Pattern and severity of rheumatic valvular lesions  
in children in Khartoum, Sudan. East. Mediterr. Health J. 14, 1015–1021 (2008).
39.	 Saleh, H. K. Pattern of rheumatic heart disease in Southern Yemen. Saudi Med. J. 28, 
108–113 (2007).
40.	 Aurakzai, H. A. et al. Echocardiographic profile of rheumatic heart disease at a tertiary 
cardiac centre. J. Ayub Med. Coll. Abbottabad 21, 122–126 (2009).
41.	
Sultan, F. et al. Rheumatic tricuspid valve disease: an evidence-based systematic 
overview. J. Heart Valve Dis. 19, 374–382 (2010).
42.	 Pettersen, M. D., Du, W., Skeens, M. E. & Humes, R. A. Regression equations for 
calculation of z scores of cardiac structures in a large cohort of healthy infants,  
children, and adolescents: an echocardiographic study. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 21, 
922–934 (2008).
43.	 Lopez, L. et al. Relationship of echocardiographic Z scores adjusted for body surface 
area to age, sex, race, and ethnicity: the Pediatric Heart Network Normal Echocardiogram 
Database. Circ. Cardiovasc. Imaging 10, e006979 (2017).
44.	 Idsoe, O., Guthe, T., Willcox, R. & De Weck, A. Nature and extent of penicillin side-reactions, 
with particular reference to fatalities from anaphylactic shock. Bull. World Health Organ. 
38, 159–188 (1968).
45.	 Sanyahumbi, A. et al. Penicillin reactions in patients with severe rheumatic heart disease: 
a presidential advisory from the American Heart Association. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 11, 
e024517 (2022).
46.	 World Health Organization. Optimizing Active Case-Finding for Tuberculosis: 
Implementation Lessons from South-East Asia (WHO, 2021).
47.	
Thomas, R., Parikh, R., Paul, P. & Muliyil, J. Population-based screening versus case 
detection. Indian J. Ophthalmol. 50, 233–237 (2002).
48.	 Council of Europe. Committee of Ministers. Recommendations No. R (94) 11 on Screening 
as a Tool of Preventive Medicine. http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/instree/coerecr94-11.html 
(1994).
49.	 Wilson, J. M. G. & Junger, G. Principals and Practices of Screening for Diseases  
(WHO, 1968).
50.	 Roberts, K., Colquhoun, S., Steer, A., Reményi, B. & Carapetis, J. Screening for  
rheumatic heart disease: current approaches and controversies. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 10, 
49–58 (2013).
51.	
Gewitz, M. H. et al. Revision of the Jones criteria for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic 
fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation 131, 1806–1818 (2015).
52.	 Marijon, E. et al. Prevalence of rheumatic heart disease detected by echocardiographic 
screening. N. Engl. J. Med. 357, 470–476 (2007).
53.	 Franco, J. et al. Investigation of the familial risk of rheumatic heart disease with 
systematic echocardiographic screening: data from the PROVAR+ family study. 
Pathogens 11, 139 (2022).
54.	 Culliford-Semmens, N. et al. Echocardiography for latent rheumatic heart disease in 
first degree relatives of children with acute rheumatic fever: implications for active case 
finding in family members. eClinicalMedicine 37, 100935 (2021).
55.	 Aliku, T. et al. Targeted echocardiographic screening for latent rheumatic heart disease  
in Northern Uganda: evaluating familial risk following identification of an index case. 
PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10, e0004727 (2016).
56.	 Nascimento, B. R. et al. Echocardiographic screening of pregnant women by non-physicians 
with remote interpretation in primary care: data from the PROVAR+ study. Circulation 140, 
A13370 (2019).
57.	
Manji, R. A. et al. Cost–effectiveness analysis of rheumatic heart disease prevention 
strategies. Expert Rev. Pharmacoecon. Outcomes Res. 13, 715–724 (2013).
58.	 Essop, M. R. & Peters, F. Contemporary issues in rheumatic fever and chronic rheumatic 
heart disease. Circulation 130, 2181–2188 (2014).
59.	 Bradley-Hewitt, T. et al. The impact of echocardiographic screening for rheumatic heart 
disease on patient quality of life. J. Pediatr. 175, 123–129 (2016).
60.	 Wark, E. K., Hodder, Y. C., Woods, C. E. & Maguire, G. P. Patient and health-care impact of 
a pilot rheumatic heart disease screening program. J. Paediatr. Child Health 49, 297–302 
(2013).
61.	
Gurney, J. et al. The benefits and harms of rheumatic heart disease screening from the 
perspective of the screened population. Int. J. Cardiol. 221, 734–740 (2016).
62.	 Zachariah, J. P. & Samnaliev, M. Echo-based screening of rheumatic heart disease in 
children: a cost–effectiveness Markov model. J. Med. Econ. 18, 410–419 (2015).
63.	 Roberts, K. et al. Echocardiographic screening for rheumatic heart disease in  
Indigenous Australian children: a cost–utility analysis. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 6, e004515 
(2017).
64.	 Vasan, R. S. et al. Echocardiographic evaluation of patients with acute rheumatic fever 
and rheumatic carditis. Circulation 94, 73–82 (1996).
65.	 Ploutz, M. et al. Handheld echocardiographic screening for rheumatic heart disease by 
non-experts. Heart 102, 35–39 (2016).
66.	 Peck, D. et al. The use of artificial intelligence guidance for rheumatic heart disease 
screening by novices. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 36, 724–732 (2023).
67.	
Voleti, S. et al. Novel handheld ultrasound technology to enhance non-expert screening 
for rheumatic heart disease in the Republic of Palau: a descriptive study. J. Paediatr. Child 
Health 57, 1089–1095 (2021).
68.	 Beaton, A. et al. Efficacy of a standardized computer-based training curriculum to  
teach echocardiographic identification of rheumatic heart disease to nonexpert users. 
Am. J. Cardiol. 117, 1783–1789 (2016).
69.	 Nascimento, B. R. et al. Integration of echocardiographic screening by non-physicians 
with remote reading in primary care. Heart 105, 283–290 (2019).
70.	 Nascimento, B. R. et al. Rheumatic heart disease echocardiographic screening: 
approaching practical and affordable solutions. Heart 102, 658–664 (2016).
71.	
Bhavnani, S. P. et al. A randomized trial of pocket-echocardiography integrated mobile 
health device assessments in modern structural heart disease clinics. JACC Cardiovasc. 
Imaging 11, 546–557 (2018).
72.	 Martins, J. et al. Towards automatic diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease on 
echocardiographic exams through video-based deep learning. J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc.  
28, 1834–1842 (2021).
73.	 Nascimento, B. R. et al. Spatial-temporal deep-learning for automatic identification 
of rheumatic heart disease in echocardiographic screening images — data from the 
PROVAR-Atmosphere study [abstract]. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 77, 3243 (2021).
74.	 Edwards, L. A. et al. Machine learning for pediatric echocardiographic mitral 
regurgitation detection. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 36, 96–104.e4 (2023).
75.	 Engelman, D. et al. Teaching focused echocardiography for rheumatic heart disease 
screening. Ann. Pediatr. Cardiol. 8, 118–121 (2015).
76.	 Carapetis, J. R., McDonald, M. & Wilson, N. J. Acute rheumatic fever. Lancet 366, 155–168 
(2005).
77.	
Lawrence, J. G., Carapetis, J. R., Griffiths, K., Edwards, K. & Condon, J. R. Acute rheumatic 
fever and rheumatic heart disease: incidence and progression in the Northern Territory of 
Australia, 1997 to 2010. Circulation 128, 492–501 (2013).
78.	 Bertaina, G. et al. Natural history of borderline rheumatic heart disease in New Caledonia: 
a prospective cohort study. Arch. Cardiovasc. Dis. Suppl. 9, 87 (2017).
79.	 Noubiap, J. J. et al. Prevalence and progression of rheumatic heart disease: a global 
systematic review and meta-analysis of population-based echocardiographic studies. 
Sci. Rep. 9, 17022 (2019).
80.	 Beaton, A. et al. Echocardiography screening for rheumatic heart disease in Ugandan 
schoolchildren. Circulation 125, 3127–3132 (2012).
81.	
Bhaya, M., Beniwal, R., Panwar, S. & Panwar, R. B. Two years of follow‐up validates the 
echocardiographic criteria for the diagnosis and screening of rheumatic heart disease in 
asymptomatic populations. Echocardiography 28, 929–933 (2011).
82.	 Zühlke, L. et al. The natural history of latent rheumatic heart disease in a 5 year  
follow-up study: a prospective observational study. BMC Cardiovasc. Disord. 16, 46 
(2016).
83.	 Ploutz, M. et al. Child and teacher acceptability of school-based echocardiographic 
screening for rheumatic heart disease in Uganda. Cardiol. Young 27, 82–89 (2017).
84.	 Perelini, F., Blair, N., Wilson, N., Farrell, A. & Aitken, A. Family acceptability of 
school-based echocardiographic screening for rheumatic heart disease in a high-risk 
population in New Zealand. J. Paediatr. Child Health 51, 682–688 (2015).
85.	 Voleti, S. et al. The personal and clinical impact of screen-detected maternal rheumatic 
heart disease in Uganda: a prospective follow up study. BMC Pregn. Childb. 20, 611 
(2020).
Author contributions
J.K., J.L., E.M., M.M., M.C.P.N., D.P., F.P., K.R., C.S., A.S., A. Saxena and K.S. contributed to 
the discussion of the manuscript content and reviewed and edited the manuscript before 
submission. K.R., A. Steer, S.V., G.W., N.W., L.Z. and B.R. contributed to the discussion of the 
manuscript content and wrote, reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission. 
J.R., J.M., J.C.M., A.O.M., C.M., E.O., B.N., L.T., A.B. and A.K. researched data for the article, 
contributed to the discussion of its content and wrote, reviewed and edited the manuscript 
before submission.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Nature Reviews Cardiology | Volume 21 | April 2024 | 250–263
263
Evidence-based guidelines
Additional information
Peer review information Nature Reviews Cardiology thanks Twalib Aliku; Peter Lwabi;  
and Roney Sampaio, who co-reviewed with Marcelo Vieira, for their contribution to the  
peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to  
this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2023, corrected publication 2024
1Division of Adult Cardiology, Uganda Heart Institute, Kampala, Uganda. 2Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research,  
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Northern Territory, Australia. 3Department of Cardiology, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 
4Department of Cardiology, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 5Department of Internal Medicine, University of Botswana and 
Princess Marina Hospital, Gaborone, Botswana. 6University Eduardo Mondlane, Maputo, Mozambique. 7Departamento de Paediatria, Faculdade de 
Medicina da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo, Horizonte, Brazil. 8Divisão de Cardiologia Pediátrica e Fetal/Serviço de Cardiologia e Cirurgia 
Cardiovascular e Serviço de Paediatria, Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo, Horizonte, Brazil. 9Departamento de Clínica 
Médica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo, Horizonte, Brazil. 10Serviço de Cardiologia e Cirurgia Cardiovascular, 
Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo, Horizonte, Brazil. 11Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. 12Department of Paediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 
13Division of Cardiology, The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 14Wesfarmers Centre of Vaccine and Infectious 
Diseases, Telethon Kids Institute, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 15School of Medicine, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, 
Australia. 16NT Cardiac, Darwin, Northern Territory, Australia. 17Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Kochi, India. 18Paediatric 
Cardiology Service of the Western Cape, Red Cross War Memorial Children’s Hospital and Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa. 19Department 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa. 20Division of Cardiology, European Georges Pompidou Hospital, 
Paris, France. 21Institut Mutualiste Montsouris, Paris, France. 22Faculty of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 23Cardiology 
Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, The Cardiovascular Centre of the University of 
Lisbon, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. 24World Heart Federation, Geneva, Switzerland. 25Division of Cardiology, 
Children’s National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA. 26Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. 27Pt BD Sharma University 
of Health Sciences, Rohtak, India. 28Cape Heart Institute, Department of Medicine and Cardiology, Groote Schuur Hospital, University of Cape Town, 
Cape Town, South Africa. 29Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 30Tropical Diseases Research Group, 
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 31Department of General Medicine, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia. 32School of Medicine, National University of Samoa, Apia, Samoa. 33Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. 
34Green Lane Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Hospital, Te Whatu Ora, Auckland, New Zealand. 35South African Medical Research 
Council, Extramural Research & Internal Portfolio, Cape Town, South Africa. 36Division of Paediatric Cardiology, Department of Paediatrics and Child 
Health, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. 37Department of Paediatrics, Royal Darwin Hospital, Darwin, Australia. 38These authors 
contributed equally: Joselyn Rwebembera, James Marangou.  
