In patients with advanced HF, when consistent with the patient’s goals of care, timely referral for HF specialty care is recommended to review HF management and assess suitability for advanced HF therapies (e.g., LVAD, cardiac transplantation, palliative care, and palliative inotropes) (1-6).

I, Intravenous inotropes N, New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IIIB to IV or persistently elevated natriuretic peptides E, End-organ dysfunction E, EF #35% D, Defibrillator shocks H, Hospitalizations >1 E, Edema despite escalating diuretics L, Low systolic BP #90, high heart rate P, Prognostic medication; progressive intolerance or down-titration of GDMT

The INTERMACS (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support) has developed 7 profiles that further stratify patients with advanced HF (Table 17) (7).

In patients with nonischemic DCM or ischemic heart disease at least 40 days post-MI with LVEF £35% and NYHA class II or III symptoms on chronic GDMT, who have reasonable expectation of meaningful survival for >1 year, ICD therapy is recommended for primary prevention of SCD to reduce total mortality (1-9).

For patients whose comorbidities or frailty limit survival with good functional capacity to <1 year, ICD and cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillation (CRT-D) are not indicated (1-9,16-21).

For patients who have LVEF £35%, sinus rhythm, left bundle branch block (LBBB) with a QRS duration ‡150 ms, and NYHA class II, III, or ambulatory IV symptoms on GDMT, CRT is indicated to reduce total mortality, reduce hospitalizations, and improve symptoms and QOL (16-21).

In patients with QRS duration <120 ms, CRT is not recommended (36-41).

In patients with chronic severe secondary MR and HFrEF, optimization of GDMT is recommended before any intervention for secondary MR related to LV dysfunction (3-5,12-14).

In select patients with advanced HFrEF with NYHA class IV symptoms who are deemed to be dependent on continuous intravenous inotropes or temporary MCS, durable LVAD implantation is effective to improve functional status, QOL, and survival (1-18).

For selected patients with advanced HF despite GDMT, cardiac transplantation is indicated to improve survival and QOL (1-3).

For all patients with HF, palliative and supportive care—including high-quality communication, conveyance of prognosis, clarifying goals of care, shared decision-making, symptom management, and caregiver support—should be provided to improve QOL and relieve suffering (1).

For patients with HF being considered for, or treated with, life-extending therapies, the option for discontinuation should be anticipated and discussed through the continuum of care, including at the time of initiation, and reassessed with changing medical conditions and shifting goals of care (2,3).

For patients with HF who are able to participate, exercise training (or regular physical activity) is recommended to improve functional status, exercise performance, and QOL (1-9).

In patients with HF, vaccinating against respiratory illnesses is reasonable to reduce mortality (10-16).

Patients with HF should receive specific education and support to facilitate HF self-care in a multidisciplinary manner (2,5-9).
