World Health Organization (WHO) Guideline
Title: WHO guideline on the prevention and diagnosis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease
Year: 2024. ISBN: 9789240100077. PMID: none (WHO publication).
Accessed: 2026-09-28. Canonical: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240100077
Local PDF: who_2024_rf_rhd_guideline.pdf (same folder, via WHO IRIS)

Key Recommendations (verbatim from full text):
1. Children, adolescents and adults with sore throat and a positive diagnostic test (either point-of-care (POC) testing or microbial confirmation) for GAS pharyngitis should be treated with antibiotics to prevent RF/RHD. (Strong recommendation, moderate certainty evidence)
2. In populations at moderate to high risk of RF and RHD and where diagnostic testing to confirm GAS (with either POC testing or microbial confirmation) is not available, children and adolescents with clinically-suspected GAS pharyngitis should be treated with antibiotics to prevent RF/RHD. (Strong recommendation, very low certainty evidence)
3. For patients with a positive diagnostic test for GAS pharyngitis or with clinically-suspected GAS, WHO recommends penicillin (intramuscular (IM) or oral) as first-line treatment for the prevention of RF/RHD. (Conditional recommendation, low certainty evidence)
4. The Jones criteria should be used for RF diagnosis in children, adolescents and adults with suspected RF. (Strong recommendation, low certainty evidence)
5. A combination of minor and major criteria together with evidence of GAS infection are needed for diagnosis.
6. Diagnosis: initial RF - 2 Major manifestations or 1 major plus 2 minor manifestations. Diagnosis: recurrent RF - 2 Major or 1 major and 2 minor or 3 minor manifestations.
7. Echocardiography has become the gold standard for evaluating patients for rheumatic carditis (during RF) and valvular pathology (during RHD), with more than 25 studies showing superiority in sensitivity and specificity compared to auscultation.
8. Echocardiography is also a powerful tool for case detection of RHD, identifying 12.9 cases per 1000 people (95% CI: 8.9-18.6) in endemic areas, compared to cardiac auscultation (2.9 cases detected per 1000 people; 95% CI: 1.7-5.0).
9. Children, adolescents and adults diagnosed with RF or RHD should be prescribed antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent RF recurrence. (Strong recommendation, moderate certainty evidence)
10. IM benzathine benzylpenicillin (BPG), is the preferred first-line approach to prevent recurrence of RF in patients with prior RF or RHD. (Strong recommendation, moderate certainty evidence)
11. If an alternative to IM BPG is needed (recommendation 4), oral penicillin is acceptable for RF and RHD prophylaxis. (Conditional recommendation, moderate certainty evidence)
12. Penicillin allergy testing should not be used in patients who have no history of penicillin allergy and who are prescribed IM BPG for secondary prevention of RHD.
13. A review of patients receiving BPG for RHD prophylaxis reported an overall rate of allergic reactions of 2%, and anaphylactic reactions and fatalities of 0.27%.
14. Data suggest that high rates of adherence (>80% of scheduled injections) are associated with reduced mortality from RHD.
