1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017 Sep;217(3):367.e1-367.e9. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2017.05.023. Epub 2017 May 17.

The association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the oxytocin receptor and 
G protein-coupled receptor kinase 6 (GRK6) genes with oxytocin dosing 
requirements and labor outcomes.

Grotegut CA(1), Ngan E(2), Garrett ME(3), Miranda ML(4), Ashley-Koch AE(3), 
Swamy GK(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Duke University, Durham, NC. Electronic address: chad.grotegut@duke.edu.
(2)School of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, NC.
(3)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC; Office of the Provost, 
Rice University, Houston, TX.
(5)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Duke University, Durham, NC.

BACKGROUND: Oxytocin is a potent uterotonic agent that is widely used for 
induction and augmentation of labor. Oxytocin has a narrow therapeutic index and 
the optimal dosing for any individual woman varies widely.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine whether genetic 
variation in the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) or in the gene encoding G 
protein-coupled receptor kinase 6 (GRK6), which regulates desensitization of the 
oxytocin receptor, could explain variation in oxytocin dosing and labor outcomes 
among women being induced near term.
STUDY DESIGN: Pregnant women with a singleton gestation residing in Durham 
County, NC, were prospectively enrolled as part of the Healthy Pregnancy, 
Healthy Baby cohort study. Those women undergoing an induction of labor at 36 
weeks or greater were genotyped for 18 haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms in OXTR and 7 haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 
GRK6 using TaqMan assays. Linear regression was used to examine the relationship 
between maternal genotype and maximal oxytocin infusion rate, total oxytocin 
dose received, and duration of labor. Logistic regression was used to test for 
the association of maternal genotype with mode of delivery. For each outcome, 
backward selection techniques were utilized to control for important confounding 
variables and additive genetic models were used. Race/ethnicity was included in 
all models because of differences in allele frequencies across populations, and 
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing was used.
RESULTS: DNA was available from 482 women undergoing induction of labor at 36 
weeks or greater. Eighteen haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
within OXTR and 7 haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms within GRK6 
were examined. Five single-nucleotide polymorphisms in OXTR showed nominal 
significance with maximal infusion rate of oxytocin, and two single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms in OXTR were associated with total oxytocin dose received. One 
single-nucleotide polymorphism in OXTR and two single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
in GRK6 were associated with duration of labor, one of which met the multiple 
testing threshold (P = .0014, rs2731664 [GRK6], mean duration of labor, 17.7 
hours vs 20.2 hours vs 23.5 hours for AA, AC, and CC genotypes, respectively). 
Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms, two in OXTR and one in GRK6, showed 
nominal significance with mode of delivery.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variation in OXTR and GRK6 is associated with the amount of 
oxytocin required as well as the duration of labor and risk for cesarean 
delivery among women undergoing induction of labor near term. With further 
research, pharmacogenomic approaches may potentially be utilized to develop 
personalized treatment to improve safety and efficacy outcomes among women 
undergoing induction of labor.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.05.023
PMCID: PMC5581254
PMID: 28526450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors report no 
conflict of interest