1. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM. 2026 Jan;8(1):101846. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajogmf.2025.101846. Epub 2025 Nov 13.

Oxytocin dosing during trial of labor after cesarean to minimize the risk of 
uterine rupture: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Nicolì P(1), Gulersen M(2), Beacham J(2), Hochler H(3), Familiari A(4), 
Locatelli A(5), Abraham C(6), Cicinelli E(7), Vitagliano A(7), Berghella V(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine (DIM), Unit of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Policlinico of Bari, Bari, Italy; 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 
Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 
Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Laniado Medical Center, Netanya, Israel.
(4)Department of Women and Child Health, Women Health Area, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli, IRCCS, Università Cattolica del S. 
Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, 
Italy; Obstetrics Unit, IRCCS San Gerardo dei Tintori, Monza, Italy.
(6)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Science, Hofstra 
University, Northwell Health System, Staten Island University Hospital, Staten 
Island, NY.
(7)Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine (DIM), Unit of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Policlinico of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 
Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. 
Electronic address: vincenzo.berghella@jefferson.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Oxytocin remains the mainstay for induction and for the management of 
labor arrest during trial of labor after cesarean (TOLAC). Therefore, the 
clinical question should be not whether to use oxytocin, but how to optimize its 
administration. This meta-analysis aimed to assess which oxytocin protocol, in 
terms of initial dose, amount of increase, timing to next increase, and maximum 
dose, may minimize the risk of uterine rupture (UR) during TOLAC.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Embase and Clinicaltrials.gov were searched up to 
September 21, 2024.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Randomized and nonrandomized studies evaluating the 
association between induction and/or augmentation with oxytocin and UR during 
TOLAC versus spontaneous TOLAC were eligible. To be included, studies had to 
report at least one parameter of the oxytocin protocol used (ie, initial dose, 
amount of increase, timing to next increase, or maximum dose). The primary 
outcome was UR.
METHODS: Effect measures were expressed as odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) and pooled using the Mantel-Haenszel method under a 
random-effects model. Oxytocin exposure was categorized to perform three 
separate meta-analyses, ie, any use (for induction and/or augmentation), for 
induction only, and for augmentation only. In all three comparisons, subgroup 
analyses assessed differences based on oxytocin initial dose (≤2 vs >2 mU/min), 
amount of increase (≤2 vs >2 mU/min), timing to next increase (<30 vs ≥ 30 
minutes), and maximum dose (≤20 vs >20 mU/min).
RESULTS: Twenty-one observational studies with 51,511 patients undergoing TOLAC 
were included. Oxytocin use during TOLAC was consistently associated with a 
significantly higher risk of UR across all analyses (any use: OR 1.94, 95% CI 
1.36-2.77, P=.0003; induction only: OR 2.07, 95% CI, 1.28-3.36, P=.003; 
augmentation only: OR 2.03, 95% CI 1.22-3.38; P=.007). Among oxytocin protocol 
parameters, the initial oxytocin dose showed no relationship with UR risk. A 
significant association was found in some analyses only for increments ≤2 
mU/min, though the >2 mU/min subgroup was consistently underpowered. A higher 
risk of UR was uniformly observed when dose escalations were performed at 
intervals <30 minutes. Both moderate (≤20 mU/min) and high (>20 mU/min) maximum 
doses were significantly associated with increased odds, with a greater risk at 
higher doses.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings showed an association between oxytocin dosing during 
TOLAC and an increased risk of UR. Specifically, they suggest that both the 
timing and cumulative exposure of oxytocin, rather than the initial or 
incremental dose alone, may critically influence UR risk during TOLAC. Protocols 
adopting longer escalation intervals (≥30 minutes) and limiting maximum doses 
(≤20 mU/min) may enhance safety during TOLAC. Reliable evidence, such as that 
from randomized trials, is required to confirm these results and define the 
optimal oxytocin regimen in TOLAC management. El resumen está disponible en 
Español al final del artículo.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajogmf.2025.101846
PMID: 41241095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]