2021 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure.

Canonical publisher URL: https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/36/3599/6358045
DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab368
PMID: 34447992

Typical symptoms of heart failure include breathlessness, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, reduced exercise tolerance, fatigue, tiredness, and ankle swelling. Specific signs include elevated jugular venous pressure, hepatojugular reflux, third heart sound (gallop rhythm), and laterally displaced apical impulse.
Natriuretic peptides (NPs) are recommended as an initial diagnostic test in patients with non-acute symptoms suspected of HF to rule out the diagnosis. The rule-out thresholds for non-acute HF are BNP <35 pg/mL or NT-proBNP <125 pg/mL.
The rule-out thresholds for acute HF are BNP <100 pg/mL or NT-proBNP <300 pg/mL.
Echocardiography is the most useful, widely available test in patients with suspected HF to establish the diagnosis. It provides immediate information on chamber volumes, ventricular systolic and diastolic function, wall thickness, valve function and pulmonary hypertension.
A 12-lead ECG is recommended for all patients with suspected HF. A completely normal ECG makes the diagnosis of HF unlikely. It can reveal abnormalities such as atrial fibrillation, Q waves indicating prior myocardial infarction, and left ventricular hypertrophy.
Chest X-ray is recommended in patients with suspected HF to detect/exclude pulmonary congestion and other pulmonary or cardiac diseases that may cause or contribute to the patient's symptoms.
The diagnosis of HFpEF requires symptoms and/or signs of HF, an LVEF ≥50%, and objective evidence of cardiac structural and/or functional abnormalities consistent with the presence of LV diastolic dysfunction/raised LV filling pressures, including raised natriuretic peptides.
Routine blood tests are recommended in all patients with suspected HF to evaluate comorbidities and suitability for specific treatments. These include full blood count, urea, creatinine, electrolytes, thyroid function, fasting glucose/HbA1c, lipids, and iron status.
Coronary angiography is recommended in patients with HF and angina pectoris despite pharmacological therapy or symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias to establish the diagnosis of coronary artery disease and evaluate for revascularization.
